The Right Way
=============

.. _the-pattern:

The Pattern
-----------

This is how you start writing any HTML-based view in Django:

.. code-block:: python

   from django.template.response import TemplateResponse

   def example_view(request, arg):
       return TemplateResponse(request, 'example.html', {})

And the corresponding urls.py:

.. code-block:: python

   from django.urls import path

   from . import views

   urlpatterns = [
       path('example/<str:arg>/', views.example_view, name='example_name'),
   ]


Which bits do you change?

* ``example_view`` should be a function name that describes your view e.g.
  ``home`` or ``article_list``.
* ``example.html`` should be the path to the template you are using. I'm not
  going to cover how to write templates anywhere in this guide. Please see the
  `Django tutorial on views and templates
  <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/intro/tutorial03/>`_, and the `Django
  template language topic
  <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/templates/language/>`_.
* ``{}``, the third argument to ``TemplateResponse``, is the context data you
  want available in your template.
* ``arg`` is a placeholder for any number of optional URL parameters — parts of
  the URL path that you are matching with a `path converter
  <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/http/urls/#path-converters>`_
  (here we used ``str``) and supplying to the view function as a parameter. You
  can remove it, or add more, but have to change the URLconf to match.
* In ``urls.py``, you change the arguments to ``path`` to be, respectively:

  * the matched URL (with any captured parts),
  * your view function defined above,
  * and an optional name that needs to be unique across your project, e.g.
    ``home`` or ``myapp_articles_list``, to enable `URL reversing
    <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/http/urls/#reverse-resolution-of-urls>`_.

That's it!

But, you need a slightly deeper understanding if you're going to write good
Django views, so this page is quite a bit longer than most, for an explanation.

The Explanation
---------------

First, it’s vital to know what a view **is**. As the `Django docs state
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/http/views/>`_:

   A view...is a Python function that takes a Web request and returns a Web response

Given that definition, what does your most basic view function look like? Time
for Hello World! In your views.py, you'd have this:


.. code-block:: python

   from django.http import HttpResponse

   def hello_world(request):
       return HttpResponse('Hello world!')


This function expects to receive a ‘request’ object as its parameter. This will
be an instance of `HttpRequest
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/request-response/#django.http.HttpRequest>`_,
which contains all the information about the request that the user's browser
sent. It then returns an `HttpResponse
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/request-response/#django.http.HttpResponse>`_
object as its return value. This contains all the data to be sent back to the
user's browser — HTTP headers and body, which is typically a web page. In our
case, we sent just the text ``Hello world!``. This request-response cycle is the
heart of the Django web framework.

In order to get Django to actually call our view function, we have to hook it
into a “URLconf” somewhere. This is covered in the `Django tutorial part 1
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/intro/tutorial01/#write-your-first-view>`_,
so I won't cover all the app layout stuff in detail — in brief, we'll have this
in our urls.py:


.. code-block:: python


   from django.urls import path

   from . import views

   urlpatterns = [
       path('hello/', views.hello_world, name='hello_world'),
   ]


In many cases, we want a single view function to actually match a family of URLs
which have some kind of parameter in them, and access that parameter in our view
function. Django has built-in support for this. Suppose we want to match URLs
like ``/hello/XXX/`` where ``XXX`` could be any string. Then our URLconf becomes:

.. code-block:: python

   urlpatterns = [
       path('hello/<str:my_arg>/', views.hello_world, name='hello_world'),
   ]

and our view signature:


.. code-block:: python

   def hello_world(request, my_arg):
       # etc


Now, for our classic web app, we are normally serving HTML i.e. web pages.
Further, our HTML normally has bits we want to insert into it — this is a
dynamic web site, not a static one — and we want to build it up in an ordered
way that will handle HTML escaping, and also provide a common set of page
elements (like navigation) for our different pages. So we'll almost always want
to use Django's template engine — covered in the `Django tutorial part 3
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/intro/tutorial03/#write-views-that-actually-do-something>`_.
Instead of passing that ``"Hello world"`` string, we're going to have a
``hello_world.html`` template, and pass it some “context data” — any dynamic
information that needs to appear in the page.

So our revised view might look like this:

.. code-block:: python

   from django.http import HttpResponse
   from django.template import loader


   def hello_world(request, my_arg):
       template = loader.get_template('hello_world.html')
       context = {}
       return HttpResponse(template.render(context, request))

Note that a template is not an essential part of a Django view — HTTP requests
and responses are the essential parts. Templates are just a way of building up
the body of the response. But for this kind of app, they are extremely common.
So, as the Django tutorial notes, there is a shortcut for this process of
loading a template, rendering it and putting it into a response — `render()
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/http/shortcuts/#django.shortcuts.render>`_. With that, we can condense our view to this:

.. code-block:: python

   from django.shortcuts import render


   def hello_world(request, my_arg):
       return render(request, 'hello_world.html', {})


The third parameter here is the empty context dictionary.

This is a great pattern for writing views. Django has one more trick up its
sleeve, however — `TemplateResponse
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/template-response/#templateresponse-objects>`_.

The issue with just using ``render`` is that you get a plain ``HttpResponse``
object back that has no memory that it ever came from a template. Sometimes,
however, it is useful to have functions return a value that does remember what
it’s “made of” — something that stores the template it is from, and the context.
This can be really useful in testing, but also if we want to something outside
of our view function (such as decorators or middleware) to check or even change
what’s in the response before it finally gets ‘rendered’ and sent to the user.

For now, you can just accept that ``TemplateResponse`` is a more useful return
value than a plain ``HttpResponse``. (If you are already using ``render``
everywhere, there is absolutely no need to go and change it though, and almost
everything in this guide will work exactly the same with ``render`` instead of
``TemplateResponse``).

With that substitution, we've arrived at the pattern you'll want to start with
for views:

.. code-block:: python

   from django.template.response import TemplateResponse

   def example_view(request, arg):
       return TemplateResponse(request, 'example.html', {})


You need to know what each bit is, as described above. **But that is the end of
the lesson**. You can skip to the next part. Or you can even just stop reading —
you now know all the essentials of writing HTML views in Django.

You don't need to learn any of the CBV APIs - ``TemplateView``, ``ListView``,
``DetailView``, ``FormView``, ``MultipleObjectMixin`` etc. etc. and all their
inheritance trees or method flowcharts. They will only make your life harder.
Print out their documentation, put in a shed — or rather, a warehouse `given how
much there is <https://ccbv.co.uk/>`_ — fill the warehouse with dynamite and
`don't look back <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sqz5dbs5zmo>`_.

Next up: :doc:`anything`.

.. _visibility:

Discussion: keep the view viewable!
-----------------------------------

The most important thing about the pattern I'm recommending is that the view
itself is visible. The fundamental nature of a view is that it is a function (or
callable) that takes a request and returns a response. This is pretty obvious in
the pattern above — we have:

* a function ✓
* that takes an argument called ``request`` ✓
* and returns some kind of response — a ``TemplateResponse`` ✓


Using CBVs we could rewrite the code as:


.. code-block:: python

   from django.views.generic import TemplateView

   class ExampleView(TemplateView):
       template_name = "example.html"


But now **all 3 essential elements of the view have disappeared**. Where is the
function or callable? Where is the request? Where is the response? To have any
idea that this matches the description of what a view is you have to know what
the base classes do, and the fundamental simplicity of what you are doing has
been obscured.

There may be reasons for doing this, of course, but let's be aware of this
problem and weigh up the advantages and disadvantages.

You might think “this is shorter than the FBV” is one of the advantages. It is,
slightly, but as soon as you add the need for :doc:`context data <context-data>`
this advantage disappears, and we'll find we have :ref:`more boilerplate
<boilerplate>`, not less, with CBVs.



